So now we come to the last section of this module, and that is iterators. It's all been
building up to iterators. And this is a situation where you might say, wow, I don't like iterators.
Iterators seem like a more complex way to write loops than just looking at like head and next and
sneaking in and violating the abstraction boundary. But as you'll see in the overall next module,
you're going to have to have very different underlying data structures. And we want to be
able to write the same code over and over again. So at some level, what we're doing here is we're
building a map implementation that can be a linked list, a hash map list, I mean, a hash-based map,
a list-based map, or a tree-based map. And what we want is this code right here. This code
should not change. We should say, hey, give me a map. We got a MapEntry, we got a map iterator.
Those are all part of the contract that we have with the object, be it a linked list, tree, or map,
a hash. We're going to do a put, put, put, put, dump, get, get. Now we're going to iterate. The hash
won't even have like a-- it doesn't have a head. And the next, it's not going to work, right? So
we're going to have to say, hey, there's this abstraction. Give me an iterator for your map,
OK? And we don't know what's in the iterator. We don't need to know what's in the iterator.
The only thing we need to know is it has a method called next. That's it. So we're basically saying,
let's get started. Give me an iterator from the map. Call the iterator method, passing the map
instance as a parameter, and give me back iterator. And then we write a while loop.
And we say, hey, iterator, give me the next thing. It is up to the iterator to start at the beginning
and then advance and move down. And when we get null, we break. If not, we print key and value
from the cur. Now, cur is of type MapEntry. There's a map iter, iter next, and then
cur is what we get back from iterator. So we get from iter, iter next, we get back a MapEntry.
And so if you recall, key and value are public in the MapEntry. So I could have had you hide those
behind sort of getters and have a get key and whatever and name those underscore. But we're
just going to leave them public attributes for now. If we were implementing Java-- I mean,
right now, we're kind of hard coding this string key integer throughout. So it's going to be OK.
And then, of course, we call the destructor on the iterator once we're kind of done with that loop.
And then we call the destructor on the overall map. And this code should be roughly the same
when we go from linked lists, hashes, to trees. This is the moment. And it's this iteration pattern.
So I'm going to do a bunch of pictures. And so I just want to-- I've been drawing some pretty complex
pictures on these things. But by now, the whole pattern of what next means and prev and these
things being null, a doubly linked list, and that key, pointing to another little-- a char star key,
which points to another little statically allocated thing, and a head points to the tail,
and a head and a tail, and all that stuff. I'm just going to, for this section, really simplify
these pictures. It's to say, look, there's a variable called head somewhere. And it points
to a z equals 22. Then it points to a w equals 42. And then that's the last one. And that points--
the next there points to null. And so I'm going to really use a succinct representation of linked
lists going forward. If we review what we don't want to do, we do not want our calling code to
know about count. We do not want it to know about head. We don't even want it to know about next
within the entries. We don't want to know that. We do want to know about key and value. And so
the calling code where map arrow number underscore head, current underscore next, no, no, no, no,
no. That's not allowed. Those are private. So in our calling code, if we're looking at things
have underscores, technically we could do it, because there's nothing in C that's stopping us.
We create those things. So we don't want to call head or count, because then if we change when we're
doing a map, head's not there anymore. I mean, hash, head's not there. Next doesn't work. I mean,
we've got to hide that. We've got to wrap it. We've got to create a strong abstraction around
this notion of starting a loop and then iterating one iteration of a loop, and then ending the loop.
We have to abstract that away. This is the concept of separation of concerns. Our calling code does
not need to be concerned about how the object can be looped through. So we need a generic notion of
looping. So you can think of the iterator object itself as a thing you create, and it sort of starts
at the beginning, and then you hit it. Next, give me another one. Give me another one. Give me another
one. And inside the iterator, the state is changing. It's like advancing. And it just gives them to you
one at a time. You can't ask it for the same one. Once it's been given to you, it's sort of like
ratcheted down to the next one. So if we look at this Python code, we start with a dictionary.
A maps to one, B to two, C to three. And we print it, and there's the dictionary. And we say,
oh, let's convert that to a list. And that list is the keys, which is A, B, C. And then say,
give me an iterator from that dictionary. We print that out, and we print the type of it.
It is of type dict underscore key iterator object. And so the iterator itself is not the entire
dictionary. It is not a list of all the keys. It is an internal structure that Python is going to
maintain. And then we're going to poke it by calling next, next, next. Now, the whole next thing,
that's probably calling an internal method like double underscore, next double underscore.
So next is part of the Python language. So if you look at the while loop, it's a while true loop.
We say item equals next. So that means give me the next available item in the iterator,
and then advance it. And if we're past the end, return me false. Then I say if item is false,
break. And otherwise, I print the item. And so I'm getting that item is A, B, and C. But the key
thing here in Python, just we're using Python to keep it as simple as possible, is the iterator is
something that's created. The iterator doesn't contain all the data. The iterator contains
pointers inside of it so that it knows what to do next. And we repeatedly probe the iterator with
the next call to get the next thing. And that both advances, returns, and indicates when we have run
out of things. So it's weird because we're so used to say like for blah, in blah, or for this, that.
But that's not how iterators work. Iterators want this next thing to happen. Let's C code to do the
iterator. You create it. You loop next through. And the C one is going to look pretty much the same
as the Python one. So if we look at the map iterator structure, it is going to have the kind
of things that we needed. We just are going to pull them in. So the concept of current,
like we've used the variable current in the past for these loops, is in the map iterator structure.
And it's private. So we've moved that from sort of a variable that was in the main scope to inside
this and made it private. The only public things we have are a next method and a del method.
And so now what we have is a simple contract. You can see our kind of outside contract for this
class is it's created by the map class. But once it's constructed, next and del are the only thing
that you can do with this. And that's that. And then we get to decide inside this class.
And so when we construct it, we're basically going to start it. We're going to allocate the
right size. We're going to take the current and point it at the first item pulling from the head
of the linked list. And then we're going to set the two methods next and del based on the address
of the implementations of the functions that implement it. And then we're done. And so because
we're inside of the map, and that's map iter, so this is what you get when you go map arrow iter,
you get this code. And so we're totally allowed to do everything private with map, because again,
the developer of the map class is the same person or team that's developing map iter. And if we
wanted to change head to x, we could, because we would just go inside all our code and change it.
But head is not exposed to the calling code, so they wouldn't notice that change. Again, that's
the key. At the moment the constructor is called before the first call to next, this is what the
map iter looks like. Current is pointing to the first item in our linked list. Then the while loop
starts and it calls head. Now you'll notice that it's kind of got this weird thing where it grabs
the current. And that's because current starts at, we could have implemented this differently,
but the way I did it was, current is pointing at head, and I have to, for the return, it's got to
return the first call to next, I grab current, and then I advance current. So at the moment that it
returns, the return value is b equals 14, and current now points at 21, d equals 21, preparing
for the next call to the next function. So then it comes in, and retval grabs 21, and that's what
we return, and then we advance to 19, and you can kind of see retval and current chase each other
down this linked list. So we return f equals 19, and then current points to null, and then we
notice that current is null, and then we return null to tell our calling code that we are finished.
So to start the iteration, to prime the iteration, we call the map object and say, hey, give me an
iterator for the map, and we get that back, and we're going to store that in our variable iterator.
Then we're going to start an infinite loop that says while one, or while true,
cur equals iter next, give me the next one, which the first time too is going to give me the first
one. Then if I got a null, I'm done with the loop, otherwise I print the key and the value of the one
I got, and then I go up and I iterate to the next one, print it, up print, up print, up print,
oh, I got a null, and then I delete the iterator. And this is super equivalent to what we do in
Python, where we say x equal, give me the iterator for the dictionary x in the variable it, then while
true, we advance to the advanced next of it, otherwise give me false. If we got a false,
we're done, and otherwise we printed it. So these two are very, very parallel. And you'll notice that
Java and C++ don't do iterators the same thing, but I wrote this C code to mimic Python's way of
doing this. So it's been quite a long journey. We really focused on abstraction and encapsulation,
and we've done it with iterators. And all we've done now is we've laid the groundwork for multiple
implementations of the map. We shouldn't have to change our main code anymore. We should be able
to put a, we build a list map, a list map, and then we're going to build a hash map, and we're
going to build a tree map. Those have increasing complexity and improved performance characteristics.
And now you really are going to start seeing why we say have abstraction so that we can fool around
underneath the abstraction and accomplish really cool things and get closer to what Python really
does underneath of a dictionary implementation.